# Tags

Tags can be used inside templates and have the following syntax:

```html
{% tag %}
```

Some tags require beginning and ending tags:

```html
{% tag %}
<!-- Content -->
{% endtag %}
```

Tags can be used to generate text, control flow by performing loops or logic, and can load external information into the template to be used by later variables.
<br />
Django has some built-in template tags.

## block and extends

`block` and `extends` tags allow us to set up template inheritance, a powerful way of cutting down on "boilerplate" in templates. Template inheritance allows you to build a base "skeleton" template that contains all the common elements of your site and defines **blocks** that child templates can override. Take a look at the following example:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
    <title>{% block title %}My amazing site{% endblock %}</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="sidebar">
      {% block sidebar %}
        <ul>
          <li><a href="/">Home</a></li>
          <li><a href="/blog/">Blog</a></li>
        </ul>
      {% endblock %}
    </div>

    <div id="content">
      {% block content %}
      {% endblock %}
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
```

This template, which we'll call `base.html`, defines an HTML skeleton document that you might use for a two-column page. **It's the job of "child" templates to fill the empty blocks with content**.
<br />
In this example, the `block` tag defines three blocks that child templates can fill in. The `block` tag tells the template engine that a child template may override those portions of the template.
<br />
A child template might look like this:

```html
{% extends "base.html" %}

{% block title %}
  My amazing blog
{% endblock %}

{% block content %}
  {% for entry in blog_entries %}
    <h2>{{ entry.title }}</h2>
    <p>{{ entry.body }}</p>
  {% endfor %}
{% endblock %}
```

The `extends` tag is the key here. It tells the template engine that this template "extends" another template. When the template system evaluates this template, first it locates the parent - in this case, `base.html`.
<br />

> - Note that since the child template didn't define the `sidebar` block, the value from the parent template is used instead. Content within a `{% block %}` tag in a parent template is always used as a fallback.
<br />
> - If you use `{% extends %}` in a template, it must be the first template tag in that template. Template inheritance won't work, otherwise.
<br />
> - For extra readability, you can optionally give a name to your {% endblock %} tag. For example:
> ```html
> {% block content %}
> <!-- Content -->
> {% endblock content %}
>```

## include

`include` loads a template and renders with the current context. This is a way of "including" other templates within a template. The template name can either be a variable or a hard-coded (quoted) string, in either single or double quotes:

```html
{% include "foo/bar.html" %}
```

> The main difference between `extends` and `include` is that with `include` we cannot override the contents of the "included" template.

## url

`url` returns an absolute path reference (a URL without the domain name) matching a given view and optional parameters:

```html
<a href="{% url 'home' %}"></a>
```

The first argument is the `name` given to the route when setting the route up in the `urlpatterns` list.