# Forms

Handling forms is a complex business. Consider Django's admin, where numerous items of data of several different types may need to be prepared for display in a form, rendered as HTML, edited using a convenient interface, returned to the server, validated and cleaned up, and then saved or passed on for further processing.
Django's form functionality can simplify and automate vast portions of this work, and can also do it more securely than most programmers would be able to do in code they wrote themselves.
Django handles three distinct parts of the work involved in forms:

- preparing and restructuring data to make it ready for rendering
- creating HTML forms for the data
- receiving and processing submitted forms and data from the client

It is possible to write code that does all of this manually, but Django can take care of it all for you.

## Implementation

1. First we need to set up a form class. For that, we create a file called `forms.py`:

```python
# root/app/forms.py

from django imports forms

class UserForm(forms.Form):
  username = forms.CharField(label="Username", max_length=100)
  email = forms.EmailField(label="Email")
```

- This defines a Form class with two fields: **username** and **email**.
- We passed the parameter `label` to both of them to render the `<label>` tag on the template (although in this case, the `label` we specified for both of them would be actually the same if we had omitted it). If we didn't want to render a label we could simply pass an empty string.
- We also specified a maximum length for the field by passing **100** to the `max_length` param.

2. Set up the route and the view that will render the form and handle the POST request:

```python
# root/app/urls.py

from django.urls import path

from . imports views

urlpatterns = [
  path('register', views.register, name='register')
]
```

```python
# root/app/views.py

from django.shortcuts import render, redirect

from .forms import UserForm

def register(request):
  if request.method == 'POST':
    form = UserForm(request.POST)

    if form.is_valid():
      return redirect('login')
    else:
      return render(request, 'register.html', {'form':form})
  else:
    form = UserForm()

    return render(request, 'register.html', {'form':form})
```

- In the `register` view, we check if the request is a `POST` or `GET` request. 
- If it's a `POST` one we instatiate our form class populating it with the body request. We then check if the form is valid and redirect the user to the `login` route.
- If it's a `GET` one we create an instance without passing anything to generate an empty form.
- We pass the `form` object as a context to the template being rendered. We will then use this object to actually render the form on our template.

3. Set up the template:

```html
<!-- root/app/templates/register.html -->

<form method="POST" action="{% url 'register' %}">
  {% csrf_token %}

  {{ form }}

  <button type="submit" class="btn btn-success">
    Register
  </button>
</form>
```

- All the form’s fields and their attributes will be unpacked into HTML markup from that `{{ form }}` by Django’s template language.

## Customizing Input

Besides the label and the maximum length, we can customize the rendered input by passing a bunch of other parameters to the field classes:

```python
from django imports forms

class UserForm(forms.Form):
  username = forms.CharField(label="Username", max_length=100)
  email = forms.EmailField(label="Email")
  description = forms.CharField(label="", widget=forms.Textarea(attrs={'class':'form-control','placeholder':'Description'}))
```

We are setting a `description` field that will be a text area. For this, we are using the `widget` parameter that allows us to set what kind of input will be rendered. In this case, we're using the `Textarea` class to set this input.
The `Textarea` class (and the other input classes) accepts some parameters and `attrs` is one of them where we can set the attributes for the rendered input. In this case, we're setting the `class` attribute where we're using a bootstrap class to customize the input and the `placeholder` attribute.

## More About Django Form Classes

All form classes are created as subclasses of either `django.forms.Form` or `django.forms.ModelForm`. You can think of `ModelForm` as a subclass of `Form`.
If you're building a database-driven app, chances are you'll have forms that map closely to Django models. For instance, you might have a `BlogComment` model, and you want to create a form that lets people submit comments. In this case, it would be redundant to define the field types in your form, because you've already defined the fields in your model.
For this reason, Django provides a helper class that lets you create a `Form` class from a Django model.
For example:

```python
from django.forms import ModelForm
from myapp.models import Article

class ArticleForm(ModelForm):
  class Meta:
    model = Article
    fields = ["pub_date", "headline", "content", "reporter"]
```

- We need to add the `Meta` class to our form class.
- The `Meta` class will have 2 attributes: `model` and `fields`.
- We pass to the `model` attribute the model we want to use. This will tell Django that the form is based on that model.
- The `fields` attribute receives a list containing the fields from the model we want to include in the form. Django will create form inputs for each of these fields.

You can notice that in this case we didn't have to set each field individually. We only needed to pass the list of fields to the `fields` attribute. But we can still set them manually in case we want to customize their behavior (adding custom widgets, labels, or vlaidation logic).

```python
from django import forms
from myapp.models import Article

class ArticleForm(forms.ModelForm):
  pub_date = forms.DateField(label="Date", widget=forms.DateInput(attrs={'class':'form-control', 'placeholder':'Date'}))

  class Meta:
    model = Article
    fields = ["pub_date", "headline", "content", "reporter"]
```

In this example, we customized the rendered date input by setting a label, a class and a placeholder for the rendered input.
Then, in our view, we can use a method called `save` that is available to all instances of a `ModelForm`:

```python
# root/app/views.py

from django.shortcuts import render, redirect

from .forms import ArticleForm

def create_article(request):
  if request.method == 'POST':
    form = ArticleForm(request.POST)

    if form.is_valid():
      form.save()

      return redirect('home')
    else:
      return render(request, 'create_article.html', {'form':form})
  else:
    form = ArticleForm()

    return render(request, 'create_article.html', {'form':form})
```

The `save` method creates and saves a database object from the data bound to the form.
A subclass of `ModelForm` can receive an existing model instance as an argument for the `instance` parameter. If this is supplied, the `save` method will udpate that instance.

```python
# root/app/views.py

from django.shortcuts import render, redirect

from myapp.models import Article
from .forms import ArticleForm

def update_article(request):
  if request.method == 'POST':
    form = ArticleForm(request.POST)

    if form.is_valid():
      form.save()

      return redirect('home')
    else:
      return render(request, 'create_article.html', {'form':form})
  elif request.method == 'PUT':
    if form.is_valid():
      article = Article.objects.get(pk=1)
      form = ArticleForm(request.PUT, instance=article)

      form.save()

      return redirect('home')
    else:
      return render(request, 'create_article.html', {'form':form})
  else:
    form = ArticleForm()

    return render(request, 'create_article.html', {'form':form})
```