# Routing

To set up routes for an application, we need to create a file called `urls` within the root directory of the app. After that, we have to reference this file in the `urlpatterns` list within the `urls` file within the root directory of the project:

```python
# root/project/urls.py

from django.contrib import admin
from django.urls import path, include

urlpatterns = [
  path('admin/', admin.site.urls),
  path('', include('website.urls'))
]
```

The `path` function receives 2 arguments:
- the base URL for the routes and either the return of the `include` function (which is essentially another group of routes config) or a handler for the URL.
- The `include` function receives the path of the app `urls` file.

> Essentially, within the project `urls` file we'll use the return of the `include` function as the second argument of the `path` function to include another group of route definitions which will be the app route definitions.

## App URL File

The app `urls` file follows the same pattern as the project `urls` file which is to set a `urlpatterns` list containing all the route definitions of your app. These route definitions will reference the functions within the app `views` file:

```python
# root/app/urls.py

from django.urls import path
from . import views

urlpatterns = [
  path('', views.home, name='home'),
  path('users', views.terms, name='users')
]
```

In the example above, we're using a function inside our `views` file as the handler for the route.

> The `name` parameter is used to give a name to that route that can be later referenced in different places.

## Views File

The `views` file is where we define the handlers for our routes.

```python
# root/app/views.py

from django.shortcuts import render

def home(request):
  return render(request, 'home.html', {})
```

The handler function receives the `request` dictionary as an argument.
Within the handler function, we return the return of the `render` function. The `render` function receives 3 arguments: 

- the `request` dictionary received
- the html file to be rendered
- a context dictionary

We need to create a directory called **templates** within the **views** directory to put these html files because Django will automatically search for them within this directory.