# Authentication

Django comes with a built-in authentication system. It handles user accounts, groups, permissions and cookie-based user sessions.

## Installation

The necessary settings are already included in the `settings.py` file generated by the `django-admin start project` command, which are the following:

```python
# root/project/settings.py

INSTALLED_APPS = [
  #...,
  'django.contrib.auth',
  'django.contrib.contenttypes'
]

MIDDLEWARE = [
  #...,
  'django.contrib.sessions.middleware.SessionMiddleware',
  'django.contrib.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware'
]
```

With this settings in place, running the command `manage.py migrate` creates the necessary database tables for auth related models and permissions for any models defined in our installed apps.

## Login

The following is a simple login flow config:

1. First we set up a basic HTML form that will call the login route:

```html
<!-- root/app/templates/login.html -->

<form method="POST" action="{% url 'login' %}">
  {% csrf_token %}

  <input type="text" name="username">
  <input type="password" name="password">
  <button type="submit">Login</button>
</form>
```

- For the `action` attribute we use the `url` tag passing the name of the route we are sending the POST request.
- We need to set the `username` attribute for the inputs.

2. Set up route:

```python
# root/app/urls.py

from django.urls import path
from . import views

urlpatterns = [
  path('home', views.home, name='home')
  path('login', views.login_user, name='login')
]

# root/app/views.py

from django.shortcuts import render, redirect
from django.contrib.auth import authenticate, login
from django.contrib import messages

def login_user(request):
  if request.method == 'POST':
    username = request.POST['username']
    password = request.POST['password']
    user = authenticate(request, username=username, password=password)

    if user is not None:
      login(request, user)

      return redirect('home')
    else:
      messages.error(request, 'Invalid credentials')

      return redirect('login')
  else:
    return render(request, 'login.html', {})
```

- Since this handler will handle both methods (GET, POST) for the same url (/login), we need to check which one is being requested.
- If it's a POST request, we access the request body through the dictionary `request.POST` and get the username and password.
- We call the function `authenticate` passing the request object, the username and the password. If the credentials are valid, a user object is returned.
- If the user object was returned, we then call the `login` function passing the request and the user object to attach the user to the current session, and call the `redirect` function passing the route name to redirect the user.
- If the user object wasn't returned, we call the `error` function from the `messages` module that allows us to store a temporary message in the request cookie or session.
- We call the `redirect` function to redirect the user.
- If it's a GET request we just render the route containing the form.

The messages can be read in the template like this:

```html
<!-- root/app/templates/login.html -->

...

{% if messages %}
  {% for message in messages %}
    <div
      class="alert alert-danger alert-dismissible fade show"
      role="alert"
    >
      {{ message }}
      <button
        type="button"
        class="btn-close"
        data-bs-dismiss="alert"
        aria-label="Close"
      ></button>
    </div>
  {% endfor %}
{% endif %}
```

In the above example we're using a bootstrap alert to render our messages.

> We cannot set the route handler name to `login` because it will conflict with the `login` function we are importing from Django when referencing it in the `urls.py` file.

> Remember that you need to redirect the user to the route that will render the template containing the **messages**. In this case, we're redirecting the user to the login route itself whenever the user object isn't returned since we're render the messages in the login route template. 
