# Data Types

Every value in Rust is of a certain *data type*, which tells Rust what kind of data is being specified so it knows how to work with that data. We'll look at two data type subsets: **scalar** and *compound*.
Keep in mind that Rust is a *statically typed* language, which means that it must know the types of all variables at compile time. The compiler can usually infer what type we want to use based on the value and how we use it.

## Scalar Types

A *scalar type* represents a single value. Rust has four primary scalar types: **integers**, **floating-point numbers**, **Booleans**, and **characters**.

### Integer Types

An *integer* is a number without a fractional component. One example an integer type would be the `u32`. This type declaration indicates that the value it's associated with should be an unsigned integer (signed integer types start with `i` instead of `u`) that takes up 32 bits of space. The following table shows the built-in integer types in Rust. We can use any of these variants to declare the type of an integer value.

| Length  | Signed | Unsigned |
| ------- | ------ | -------- |
| 8-bit   | i8     | u8       |
| 16-bit  | i16    | u16      |
| 32-bit  | i32    | u32      |
| 64-bit  | i64    | u64      |
| 128-bit | i128   | u128     |
| arch    | isize  | usize    |

Each variant can be either signed or unsigned and has an explicit size. *Signed* and *unsigned* refer to whether it's possible for the number to be negative - in other words, whether the number needs to have a sign with it (signed) or whether it will only ever be positive and can therefore be represented without a sign (unsigned).
Each signed variant can store numbers from **-(2 ^ (n - 1))** to **2 ^ (n - 1) - 1** inclusive, where *n* is the number of bits that variant uses. So an `i8` can store numbers from **-(2 ^ 7)** to **2 ^ 7 - 1**, which equals **-128** to **127**.
Unsigned variants can store numbers from **0** to **2 ^ n - 1**, so a `u8` can store numbers from **0** to **2 ^ 8 -1**, which equals to **0** to **255**.
Additionally, the `isize` and `usize` types depend on the architecture of the computer your program is running on, which is denoted in the table as "arch": 64 bits if you're on a 64-bit architecture and 32 bits if you're on a 32-bit architecture.
So how do you know which type of integer to use? If you're unsure, Rust's defaults are generally good places to start: integer types default to `i32`. The primary situation in which you'd use `isize` or `usize` is when indexing some sort of collection.