# Virtual Environment

By default, pip installs all packages globally. To install packages only in a specific project, we need to use a tool called `virtualenv`. `virtualenv` creates an isolated environment for a specific project.
To install it we can run:

```
pip install virtualenv
```

Or:

```
pip3 install virtualenv
```

Now we can use `virtualenv` by using it inside our projects. All we need to do is to go to the root directory of the project and run the following command:

```
python -m venv .venv
```

The command above will create a folder called `.venv` within the root directory of the project. This directory will hold a lot of other directories and files.
<br/>
Whenever we install a package using `pip`, it will use the global Python interpreter (`/usr/bin/python3`) defined in the `$PATH` variable, which will cause the package to be installed globally (under `/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages`). That's why we need to activate the virtual environment created by `virtualenv`. To do this, after setting it up, run the following command:

```
source .venv/bin/activate
```

> Depending on the command line you're using, you're see it gets a little bit different when the virtual env is active.

This will *activate* the virtual environment by setting the Python interpreter `$PATH` variable pointing to the binary created within our virtual environment (`.venv/bin/python3`). Now, all packages intalled by `pip` will be installed within `.venv/lib/python3/site-packages`.
<br />
To deactivate the virtual env you can use the following command:

```
deactivate
```

## pip freeze

`pip freeze` is used to list all packages installed in the current environment. We can redirect this list to a text file that can be used later by another user that wants to install the same packages, after cloning the project for example.

```
pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

> The filename can be anything but `requirements` is a standard name used by the community.

To install the packages listed in this file we use `pip` with the `-r` parameter:

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```